High in this video we're going to take a look at rational numbers now rational numbers are simply fractions
of integer numbers.
So things like for example one half minus 22 over 7 and so on.
These are all fractions of integers that can be positive or negative.
And those are called rational numbers.
Examples of irrational numbers might be things like square root of two.
That's an irrational number.
Pi is also an irrational number.
So any real number have a finite number of digits is also irrational numbers.
So for example 0.45 can simply be written as 45 divided by 100.
So that is a rational number.
Similarly if we take a look at this long one here Zero Point 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 which has 9 digits after
the decimal point.
Then that is actually also a irrational number.
We can just write it as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 divided by 10 to the 9 and that same vein eight point three
over four is also rational because the top number is a rational number.
The bottom number is also rational and a fraction of two rational numbers is also a rational number.
How do we get that.
Well 8.3 is the same thing as 83 divided by 10 and divided by four.
And if we work out the multiplication we simply get 83 over 40.
So eight point three over four is the same thing as 83 over 40.
So that is a rational number 8.3 divided by 1.4.
Same thing there.
We can write that essentially if we multiply by 10 above and below the fraction.
Then we have 83 over 14.
Or you can also work it out this way.
So there is also a rational number.
So any real number that has a finite number of digits after the decimal point and a finite number of
digits before the decimal point is irrational numbers.
So let's take a look at the fraction class that is used in Python to represent rational numbers.
And that comes from the fractions model.
There was a fraction class and the fractions module that we can use to handle those numbers.
So the first thing we'll need to do in our code is to import the fraction.
Either we can import the entire module or we can just simply import what we need from the modules so
we'll import the fractioned class and then we can use the constructors of the fraction class to construct
new Fraction's new rational numbers.
So for example Ezekiel's fraction of 3Com for that will be three quarters three divided by four.
We have fraction of 22 over 7 right.
That will be 22 over 7 and fractions 6 commet 10 will give us six tenths which is three fifths.
So fractions are automatically reduced by the fraction class.
So in that example when we take fraction of 610 that will actually give us fraction three comma five
three fifths it will do that domestically for us that will find the you know it will it will basically
reduce or simplify the fraction as far as it can.
Negative signs Well yes rational numbers can be negative.
And when you look at a fraction you can really put your negative sign either above or below the line.
It doesn't matter and because it doesn't matter if Python chooses to always put the negative sign with
the numerator.
So if you were to write fraction 1 come a negative fourth you'll end up with a fraction negative 1 come
for it will switch the negative sign to the numerator.
But it means the same thing.
They both the same number.
So let's look at the constructors in a little bit more detail.
We've seen the first one where we have to specify the numerator and denominator.
If we don't specify the numerator it will default to 0.
We don't specify the denominator they will default to 1 we can also create a fraction from another fraction
object.
We can also create a fraction from a float and we'll take a look at that in a minute as well as decimal
and decimals and floats are both representations of real numbers.
So basically we can take a real number and cast it or convert it to a fraction using these two variants
of the fractions constructors are an interesting one too as we can pass in a string.
Now we've seen that before with integers.
Right.
We can pass a string that evaluates to an integer and we can create an int out of it.
So very similar if we can pass in a number let's say 10.
Right.
So that's really going to be an integer.
And we can create a fraction where we're creating an integer in the numerator.
Right.
And then the denominator is going to be 1 because it's not specified.
So when we get that it's actually equivalent to Fraction 10 come a 1.
So we can pass in things like that.
We can even pass in a real number zero point to five.
This is a float there are about 1 to 5 is one.
And in fact when we do that we get a fraction of 1 Khama 8.
What's more interesting is that you can actually specify your fraction in this form and here using a
slash.
So the string 22 slash 7 which is 22 over 7 will actually get created as a fraction 22 comes 7.
So that's really handy to have that around.
Now the standard arithmetic operators are supported plus minus as well as other mathematical operators
too.
But these standard of arithmetic operators result in fraction objects as well.
If you add two fractions you get another fraction right to rational numbers you get another rational
number.
If you subtract multiply or divide rational numbers you end up with rational numbers as well.
So for example two thirds times a half while that's 2 6 which is one third.
And so if we write fraction to come with three times fraction 102 we'll get fraction one come at three.
So again Python will do the multiplication for us and also automatically reduce.
Right so we will go from 2 6 to 1 3rd.
Similarly we can we have though of addition Python will find the greatest common denominator which is
in this case cases 6.
So two thirds plus one half ends up as 6.
And in fact that's what we will get as well in Python.
Now we can also recover the numerator and denominator of the fraction objects by using the numerator
and denominator properties of our fraction object.
So for example let's say we are fraction 22 comes 7 then X dot numerator will return 22.
That will be an integer and X that denominator will also be an integer.
And in this case it will return 7.
Now let's get back to this statement that we had earlier that floats have a finite precision.
Now we'll examine floats in a lot more detail in an upcoming video.
But for now I mean we have a computer and any number that we can store in the computer is finite.
So floating point numbers are also finite in the sense that you can only use so many digits to represent
any particular number.
So in any computing language in you know floats have a finite precision.
We don't have an infinite amount of numbers that we can use.
So that means what we said that any real number that has a finite number of digits is a rational number.
Well that means that in Python and in any programming language for that matter any float object actually
can be written as a fraction.
They are actual rational numbers.
We don't think of them that way but they are rational because they have a finite number of digits that
represent them.
So if we look at fractions 0.75 again that's a float with a finite number of digits.
This is three quarters.
And we'll end up with Fraction 3Com for for look at fraction 1 point 3 7 5.
But that is actually 11 over 8.
So let's take a look at something interesting.
We're going to work with irrational numbers numbers that are not rational that we know are not rational
like pi and square root of two.
And let's see what happens.
So all impled math for us so we can grab pi.
So X will be a fraction of math dot pi.
And when we look at the result of that this is what we get.
So pi is an irrational number.
But Python was able to find an approximation using a rational number.
Same thing with square root of two.
If we take y equal to fraction of math of square root of 2 then we get this big fraction here.
Now PI and Ruutu are both irrational numbers but of course what happened is that internally they are
represented as floats.
Right math top Pi is a floating point numbers.
But it is a finite precision.
So because the finite precision there are expressible as rational numbers but they are just an approximation.
So pi is not equal to this fraction here.
Square root of two is not equal to that fraction.
There are approximately equal to that
so now one word of warning because I've shown you some kind of very clean examples of one eighth and
three quarters and so on.
But there's a really important caveat and we'll look at that and a lot more detail again when we cover
floats in an upcoming video.
But for right now because we're talking about these rational numbers I want you to be really aware of
one problem that we have.
If we look at one eighth.
Now one eighth which is zero point one to five has an exact float representation.
It is 0.1 to 5.
And it can be represented as a float.
Exactly.
In Python.
So we get you know a fraction point of 0.1 to 5 is fraction 1 come of age.
We've converted that float to this fraction here of 1.
But three tenths which is 0.3.
So 0.3 is a float actually does not have an exact representation.
And what happens when we then try and convert that to a fraction is that we get this big you know horrible
fraction here we don't get fraction 3Com at 10 as we might ask expect and that's because 0.3 isn't exactly
0.3 when it's stored as a float.
It's slightly different.
How different was take a look.
If we print 0.3 up to five decimal points or up to five digits after the decimal point.
This is what we get.
That looks good.
You know that 0.3.
So 0.3 0.3 0 0 0 that looks good.
Well let's expand the number of digits that we use and this is where we get.
So if we go to 25 digits after the decimal point this is the number that's actually being stored not
0.3.
Now that would not be the case with one eighth of 0.1 to 5 it would be zero point to 5 and that all
zeros after that and we'll get to why when we come floats.
So that's really important to remember and that's why that we got that huge fracture.
Now we can do something that constrains the denominator when we're converting a float let's say to a
fraction.
So given a fraction object so we can create a fraction object remember from either using integers or
using floats and we can then find an approximate equivalent fraction where the denominator is constrained.
So what do I mean by that.
Well and by the way we'll use this limit denominator instance method where we can specify the max denominator.
So what this does is it finds the closest rational number which could be equal.
But the closest one it will find the closest rational number to this fraction but the denominator will
be constrained so that it will not exceed max denominator.
So let's take a look at an example for look X equals fraction of math of Pi which remember was the big
horrendous fraction here.
Which evaluates as a float to this number here which is an approximation of pi.
We can choose to take this fraction and tell Python.
Well give me the closest fraction whether denominator is no greater than 10.
So how close can we get with a denominator no greater than 10 to this number here.
Do we know Pi basically.
And we will get 22 over 7 and if we actually look at the floats equivalent of that.
While this is three point 1 4 to 8 you can see we're correct up to the second digit after the decimal
point.
Now similarly we can tell Python to find the closest fraction the closest rational number where the
denominator does not exceed 100.
And it will calculate and find that three hundred and eleven over 99 is the closest we can get.
And if we evaluate that as a float this is what we get.
Three point 1 4 1 4 1 for recurring.
So you can see we're a little bit more accurate a little closer to the actual value of pi than 22 over
7.
Now we can push that up even further.
Let's say we go with a denominator no greater than 500 then this 355 over 113 is a closer approximation
of pi.
You know with the constraint that the denominator would be no greater than 500.
We evaluate that we get three point 1 4 1 5 9 2 and this is where you know we get the arm we match all
the digits up to there's 9 2 over here.
OK.
And you can keep bumping up that limit.
So let's take a look at some code and see how all that was.